*lazy-nix-helper.nvim.txt*  For Neovim >= 0.9.0? Last change: 2023 December 04

==============================================================================
Table of Contents                     *lazy-nix-helper.nvim-table-of-contents*

1. Lazy-Nix-Helper                      |lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper|
  - Motivation               |lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-motivation|
  - Compromise               |lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-compromise|
  - How it works           |lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-how-it-works|
  - Requirements           |lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-requirements|
  - Installation           |lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-installation|
  - Configuration         |lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-configuration|
  - Known Limitations |lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-known-limitations|
  - Troubleshooting     |lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-troubleshooting|

==============================================================================
1. Lazy-Nix-Helper                      *lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper*

A neovim plugin allowing a single neovim configuration with the Lazy plugin
manager to be used on NixOS and other platforms. This plugin makes the
following arrangement possible:

- On NixOS:
    - plugins (and LSP servers/DAP servers/linters/formatters) installed via Nix
    - configuration of plugins via Lazy
    - lazy loading of plugins via Lazy
- On other platforms:
    - the same neovim configuration files you use on NixOS
    - plugins installed via Lazy installed via Lazy as normal
    - LSP servers/DAP servers/linters/formatters installed via Mason as normal
    - configuration via Lazy as normal
    - lazy loading of plugins via Lazy as normal


MOTIVATION                   *lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-motivation*

When I switched to NixOS I had an existing neovim configuration using the Lazy
plugin manager. Home Manager in NixOS provides it’s own way to manage
installation and configuration of neovim plugins, but migrating would be a
heavy lift. If I could run NixOS everywhere, I would probably have spent the
effort to migrate. I’m not so lucky, so this plugin was created to let me
have a portable neovim config that works nicely on and off NixOS.


COMPROMISE                   *lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-compromise*

Normally when using Lazy plugins are configured with a github plugin URL, which
Lazy uses to download and install the plugin. However, Lazy also provides a
`dir` configuration option for the installation of local plugins. By setting
the `dir` value for each plugin to its location in the nix store, we are able
to let Nix manage the installation of our plugins, while letting Lazy manage
the configuration.


HOW IT WORKS               *lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-how-it-works*

Lazy-Nix-Helper searches the nix store for all installed vim plugins and builds
a table associating each plugin’s name with its nix store path. The
`get_plugin_path()` function will return the nix store path corresponding to a
given plugin name.


REQUIREMENTS               *lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-requirements*

Note: the docs list neovim version >= 0.9.0 as a requirement. It will probably
work for much earlier versions, but that’s all I’ve tested it on so far.

TODO: - compatible neovim versions? - nixos compatibility? - dependencies? -
neovim io.popen() not available on all platforms


INSTALLATION               *lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-installation*


NIXOS ~

I haven’t packaged Lazy-Nix-Helper on NixOS yet, so for now you’ll have to
write your own derivation.


OTHER PLATFORMS ~

The configuration instructions below include code that will install
Lazy-Nix-Helper from GitHub when the given nix store path for Lazy-Nix-Helper
does not exist.


CONFIGURATION             *lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-configuration*


LAZY-NIX-HELPER CONFIGURATION ~

**Lazy-Nix-Helper’s own Nix Store Path**

The nix store path for the Lazy-Nix-Helper plugin itself cannot be provided by
Lazy-Nix-Helper. We can’t rely on the built in functionality to find the nix
store path because the plugin hasn’t been loaded yet, and the plugin can’t
be loaded without its nix store path, etc.

The config instructions below have you manually set the nix store path for
Lazy-Nix-Helper in your config. This is a pain and will break every time you
update Lazy-Nix-Helper.

**Loading Before Lazy**

Because Lazy will resolve plugin configurations before loading any plugins, we
must load Lazy-Nix-Helper manually before loading lazy.

**Updating init.lua**

These instructions will assume you are already installing and loading Lazy with
the instructions provided by the Lazy README. If you are doing something
different then you may have to adapt these instructions to fit your own config

The Lazy README recommends adding the following to your `init.lua`:

>lua
    -- set lazypath variable to the path where the Lazy plugin will be installed on your system
    -- if Lazy is not already installed there, download and install it
    local lazypath = vim.fn.stdpath("data") .. "/lazy/lazy.nvim"
    if not vim.loop.fs_stat(lazypath) then
      vim.fn.system({
        "git",
        "clone",
        "--filter=blob:none",
        "https://github.com/folke/lazy.nvim.git",
        "--branch=stable", -- latest stable release
        lazypath,
      })
    end
    -- add the Lazy plugin to the vim runtime
    vim.opt.rtp:prepend(lazypath)
    
    -- set mapleader before loading lazy if applicable
    vim.g.mapleader = " "
    
    -- install and load plugins from your configuration
    require("lazy").setup(plugins, opts)
<

To update this configuration to work with Lazy-Nix-Helper, we will: - bootstrap
Lazy-Nix-Helper - add Lazy-Nix-Helper to the vim runtime - call the
Lazy-Nix-Helper `setup()` function - set the lazypath using Lazy-Nix-Helper

Update the configuration as follows:

>lua
    -- manually set this to your nix store path for lazy-nix-helper. TODO: improve
    local lazy_nix_helper_path = <lazy_nix_helper/nix/store/path>
    -- if we are not on a nix-based system, bootstrap lazy_nix_helper in the same way lazy is bootstrapped
    if not vim.loop.fs_stat(lazy_nix_helper_path) then
      lazy_nix_helper_path = vim.fn.stdpath("data") .. "/lazy_nix_helper/lazy_nix_helper.nvim"
      if not vim.loop.fs_stat(lazy_nix_helper_path) then
        vim.fn.system({
          "git",
          "clone",
          "--filter=blob:none",
          "https://github.com/b-src/lazy_nix_helper.nvim.git",
          lazy_nix_helper_path,
        })
      end
    end
    
    -- add the Lazy-Nix-Helper plugin to the vim runtime
    vim.opt.rtp:prepend(lazy_nix_helper_path)
    
    -- call the Lazy-Nix-Helper setup function. pass a default lazypath for non-nix systems as an argument
    local non_nix_lazypath = vim.fn.stdpath("data") .. "/lazy/lazy.nvim"
    require("lazy-nix-helper").setup({ lazypath = non_nix_lazypath })
    
    -- get the lazypath from Lazy-Nix-Helper
    local lazypath = require("lazy-nix-helper").lazypath()
    -- the rest of the configuration is unchanged
    if not vim.loop.fs_stat(lazypath) then
      vim.fn.system({
        "git",
        "clone",
        "--filter=blob:none",
        "https://github.com/folke/lazy.nvim.git",
        "--branch=stable", -- latest stable release
        lazypath,
      })
    end
    -- add the Lazy plugin to the vim runtime
    vim.opt.rtp:prepend(lazypath)
    
    -- set mapleader before loading lazy if applicable
    vim.g.mapleader = " "
    
    -- install and load plugins from your configuration
    require("lazy").setup(plugins, opts)
<


CONFIGURATION OF OTHER PLUGINS ~

To provide nix store paths to the rest of the plugins in your configuration,
update their configuration as in this example

>lua
    {
      repo/my-cool-plugin.nvim,
      dir = require("lazy-nix-helper").get_plugin_path("my-cool-plugin"),
      ...
    }
<

Don’t forget to update each plugin’s dependencies as well

>lua
    {
      repo/my-cool-plugin.nvim,
      dir = require("lazy-nix-helper").get_plugin_path("my-cool-plugin"),
      dependencies = {
        {
          repo/my-cool-plugins-dep.nvim,
          dir = require("lazy-nix-helper").get_plugin_path("my-cool-plugins-dep"),
          ...
        },
        ...
      },
      ...
    }
<

The `get_plugin_path` function is case sensitive as well as sensitive to the
difference between `-` and `_`. Be careful that you are matching the convention
used by each plugin as you configure its `get_plugin_path` call. Some plugins
will also require ".nvim" to be appended to the plugin name.


MASON ~

Mason is a package manager for LSP servers, DAP servers, linters, and
formatters. Just like plugin management with Lazy, this conflicts with Nix. The
easiest way to keep mason in your config on non-Nix platforms while disabling
it on NixOS is to use the provided `mason_enabled` function to conditionally
enable Mason.

This will require you to separately declare all your LSP servers etc. in your
NixOS config, but you were doing that already, right?

There are two parts to this: 1. disabling the `mason` (and `mason-lspconfig`)
plugins 2. checking that `mason` (and `mason-lspconfig`) are enabled before
they are used elsewhere in your config

**Conditionally enabling mason**

Here’s an example mason configuration as a dependency of `nvim-lspconfig`.
Notice that we are using `mason_enabled` to conditionally enable both `mason`
and `mason-lspconfig`

>lua
    {
      "neovim/nvim-lspconfig",
      dir = require("lazy-nix-helper").get_plugin_path("nvim-lspconfig"),
      dependencies = {
        {
          "williamboman/mason.nvim",
          enable = require("lazy-nix-helper").mason_enabled(),
          ...
        },
        {
          "williamboman/mason-lspconfig.nvim",
          enable = require("lazy-nix-helper").mason_enabled(),
          ...
        },
        ...
      },
      ...
    }
<

Note that specifying the `dir` parameter is not necessary here since these
plugins will be disabled in NixOS.

**Conditionally calling mason**

This part is harder to give examples for because there are a lot of ways you
could be setting this up.

I based my original neovim configuration on kickstart.nvim
<https://github.com/nvim-lua/kickstart.nvim/tree/master>, which had checks that
`mason` and `mason-lspconfig` were enabled already built again. This was before
they migrated to using Lazy, and it looks like this has changed sense.

Some general advice:

- You can still use the `mason_enabled()` function to gate `mason` or `mason-lspconfig` calls in your configuration
- Make sure that `lsp-config.setup()` function is still called for each server

After making these changes in my own config LSP servers were working for me on
NixOS.

**Caveat for Linters and Formatters**

In my own config I don’t use linters or formatters provided by mason. I
prefer to handle that on a per-project basis or use tools provided by the
language. I haven’t tested this plugin with a configuration that includes
linters or formatters, and can’t confirm that they work with this setup.


KNOWN LIMITATIONS     *lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-known-limitations*

Lazy-Nix-Helper can’t currently find plugins installed by Nix on non-NixOS
platforms.

Currently only plugins in the `vimplugin` or `lua5.1` package groups are found.
That includes all the plugins that I use, but I think there are other package
groups where neovim plugins can exist.


TROUBLESHOOTING         *lazy-nix-helper.nvim-lazy-nix-helper-troubleshooting*


HOW DO I CHECK WHICH PATH A PLUGIN IS LOADED FROM? ~

Use the `:Lazy` command to open the Lazy dashboard. The source directory is
listed for each plugin


HOW DO I CHECK WHICH PATH LAZY-NIX-HELPER HAS FOUND FOR A PLUGIN? ~

Run the `get_plugin_path` function manually: `:lua
print(require("lazy-nix-helper").get_plugin_path("<plugin-name>"))`


HOW DO I CHECK ALL OF THE PLUGINS THAT LAZY-NIX-HELPER HAS FOUND? ~

Run the `list_discovered_plugins` function manually: `lua
require("lazy-nix-helper").list_discovered_plugins()`


I DON’T THINK LAZY-NIX-HELPER IS CORRECTLY DETECTING WHEN I’M ON NIXOS ~

Run the `print_environment_info` function manually to see: - if Lazy-Nix-Helper
thinks you’re on NixOS or not - if Lazy-Nix-Helper thinks nix-store is
installed or not

`lua require("lazy-nix-helper").print_environment_info()`

Generated by panvimdoc <https://github.com/kdheepak/panvimdoc>

vim:tw=78:ts=8:noet:ft=help:norl:
